This repo gathers the input files and scripts related to our study entitled "**Global risk mapping of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 and H5Nx in the light of epidemic episodes occurring from 2020 onward**" (Dupas *et al*. *submitted*). R scripts related to the analyses are all gathered within the file `Script_H5Nx_study.r`.

Abstract: Avian influenza (AI) is a highly contagious viral disease affecting poultry and wild water birds, posing significant global challenges due to its high mortality rates and economic impacts. Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) outbreaks, particularly those caused by H5N1 and its variants, have surged since their first occurrence in 1959. The HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses have notably expanded its geographical reach, affecting numerous countries, diverse avian species, and now wild and domestic mammals. Using an ecological niche modelling approach, this study aims to elucidate the environmental factors associated with the increased HPAI H5 cases since 2020, investigate potential shifts in ecological niches, and predict new areas suitable for local viral circulation. Focusing on H5N1 and H5Nx strains, we have developed ecological niche models for HPAI case in both wild and domestic birds while considering two distinct periods: 2015-2020 and 2020-2022. Key environmental predictors include chicken and duck population density, human density, distance to water bodies, and several land cover variables. Post-2020, we observe a notable increase in the relative importance of some of these predictors, such as intensive chicken population density and cultivated vegetation. The resulting risk maps reveal notable ecological suitability for local HPAI H5 circulation in Europe, Asia, as well as North and South America, with notable expansions of the areas at risk post-2020. The spatial distribution of HPAI H5 occurrences in wild birds appears to be primarily influenced by urban areas and open water regions. Overall, global risk maps derived from our models identify regions at risk where surveillance and control measures should be prioritised. Finally, our analyses also highlight a shift in the diversity of species affected by HPAI outbreaks, with a higher variety of avian species, particularly sea birds, being impacted post-2020. This increased diversity suggests that ecological shifts in HPAI H5 circulation may be accompanied by a broader range of susceptible species. Overall, these results further contribute to the understanding of HPAI epidemiology.
